.. post:: Nov 28, 2025
    :author: Denis Gomes
    :tags: ASME, B36.10M, Pipe Table
    :category: Standard, Specification
    :exclude:

    The fundamentals of piping - The Pipe.


===============
What is Piping?
===============
Upon casual inspection it is evident that piping surrounds us and touches every
aspect our daily lives, from the moment we wake up and turn on the lights to
the when we brush our teeth before heading to bed. We all rely on piping and
piping systems implicitly or explicitly in some way or another every day.
Fundamentally, a piping system is used to transport fluid from one location to
another. They are essential to every facet of modern society, from nuclear
power plants that provide the electricity to power our homes to residential and
commercial building plumbing.

Piping systems consists of pipes, fittings, flanges, valves, and other pressure
retaining components used to compose a piping layout. A piping system also
consists of non pressure retaining components such as pipe supports and
hangers. A piping system is sometimes loosely referred to as just "piping".


Standard
========
A pipe is the basic building block of all piping systems. It is a cylinderical
hollow cross section conforming to the following ASME Standards:

* ASME B36.10M - Welded and Seamless Wrought Steel Pipe
* ASME B36.19 - Stainless Steel Pipe

ASME B36.10M is a standard specification for welded and seamless wrought steel
pipes which are used for high or low temperatures and pressures. This standard
is also extensively used for welded and seamless pipes made from other ferrous
and non-ferrous alloys such as nickel, titanium, zirconium, tantalum, aluminum
and copper, etc. Similarly, the ASME B36.19 is the standard specification for
stainless steel pipes. All materials shall be covered in corresponding ASTM or
ASME specifications.

Size
----
The cross section of a pipe is fully defined in the ASME and equivalent
international standards by the outer diameter, given by the Nominal Pipe Size
(NPS) and the thickness (or pipe wall), given by the schedule (SCH). It is
important to note that pipe sizes up to and including 12 inches have an actual
outer diameter slighly larger than the NPS. For pipe sizes 14 inches and above,
the NPS is equal to the actual outer diameter. As a rule of thumb, odd number
pipe sizes, such as 3, 5, 7, etc., are typically not found off the shelf and
should be avoided if possible. Refer to :ref:`Pipe Table <pipe-table-label>`
for a listing of various sizes defined in the standards.

Thickness
---------
The SCH of a pipe depends on the pressure it must be capable of handling. For
low to modern pressure systems, a standard (STD) or standard weight (STD WT)
pipe wall may suffice. For high pressure systems a thicker wall, such as extra
strong (XS) or extra heavy (XH) schedule may be required. Extreme pressure
service may call for extra strong (XXS) or double extra heavy (XXH). It is not
unusual for certain high pressure-temperature systems to call out custom pipe
sizes and schedules outside the ASME or equivalent standards. These special
cases should be considered on a case by case basis because the cost of custom
pipe wall is generally more expensive and results in increased manufacturing
times. On that note, if custom sizes are required, it may be more economical to
utilize ID controlled piping to reduce the overall wall thickness. However, the
designer has to be mindful of the potential costs associated with the
non-standard OD, for example, non-standard pipe support clamps and connection
interfaces with standard size piping components. Refer to :ref:`Pipe Table
<pipe-table-label>` for a listing of various schedules and thicknesses defined
in the standards.


Manufacturing
=============
There are several different types/forms of pipes, dependent on how the shape is
manufactured. The following are the most common types/forms used in the power
industry:

* Seamless
* Seam welded
* Forged

Seamless
--------
A common appoach to produce a seamless pipe is to pierce a billet to the
desired tube shell and pushing a mandrel through it to stretch the billet to
the required length. Pipes created in this manner are referred to as seamless
pipe because they lack welding seams or joints. The inspection requirements for
these pipes are minimal compared to their seam welded counterpart. However,
seamless piping requires the consideration of manufacturing mill tolerance
(typically 12.5%), which is a direct result of potential inaccuray of the
milling process, i.e. the mandrel might penetrate the billet in a slight angle.
As a result, seamless pipe will tend to be slightly thicker than its
counterpart.

.. raw:: html

    <iframe width="100%" height=500
        src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/uvURCXAGkYQ"
        title="Seamless pipe manufacturing is revolutionizing industries"
        allowfullscreen>
    </iframe>

Seam Welded
-----------
The hollow cylinderical section can also be produced by taking a flat plate,
rolling it and welding the ends together. This kind of pipe is referred to as
being seam welded. The welded longitudinal seam is an area for potential
failure and thus proper inspection and Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) must be
performed accordingly. Seam-related corrosion can also be an issue for highly
corrosive environments. However, seam welded piping tends to be cheaper than
their seamless counterpart, avaiable of a variety of larger sizes and quick to
manufacture. For seam welded pipe the rolling process can be performed either
on a hot or cold plate material.

Hot Rolled
^^^^^^^^^^
Hot rolling involves heating the material and then rolling it into shape. It
is heated in a furnace and passed through a series of rolling mills to get
the standard size and shape. Finally, the steel is gradually cooled to room
temperature and the ends are welded together.

.. raw:: html

    <iframe width="100%" height=500
        src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8bpTqbB_cEs"
        title="Hot rolled 42crmo steel pipe manufacturing process, quenched thick wall seamless steel pipe in stock"
        allowfullscreen>
    </iframe>


Cold Rolled
^^^^^^^^^^^
Cold rolling is done at room temperature. The material is first rolled to the
required size and shape. It is then then annealed, i.e. heat treated, to
relieve internal stresses and improved ductility. Finally, the ends are welded
together.


.. raw:: html

    <iframe width="100%" height=500
        src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/jCzJpGYVlGY"
        title="The Cold Rolling Process of Steel Sheets Explained"
        allowfullscreen>
    </iframe>


.. csv-table:: Summary Table Hot vs Cold Rolled
    :header: "Feature", "Hot Rolled Pipe", "Cold Rolled Pipe"
    :widths: 10 15 15

    *Temperature*, "Above metal recrystallization", room
    *Properties*, "Lower strength, higher ductility", "Higher strength, lower ductility"
    *Finish*, Rough, Smooth
    *Tolerance*, "Less precise", "More precise"
    *Application*, "Structural components, pipelines, heavy machines", "Precision applications, auto parts, furniture"
    *Cost*, "Cheaper", "More expensive"

Forged
------
.. raw:: html

    <iframe width="100%" height=500
        src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/EjplD5e0P3w"
        title="Inside the factory Team Handling Red-Hot Steel With Zero Fear #process #forging #machine #factory"
        allowfullscreen>
    </iframe>


.. _pipe-table-label:

Pipe Table
==========

.. thebe-button:: Make Live

.. jupyter-execute::
    :hide-code:

    import os
    import pandas as pd

    # Permanently changes the pandas settings
    pd.set_option('display.max_rows', None)
    pd.set_option('display.max_columns', None)
    pd.set_option('display.width', None)
    pd.set_option('display.max_colwidth', None)

    import ipywidgets as widgets
    from IPython.display import display, HTML

    POST_DIR = os.path.join("posts", "2025")

    df = pd.read_csv(os.path.join(POST_DIR, "pipe_table.csv"))

    def filter_df(NPS):
        if NPS == "All":
            display(HTML(df.to_html(index=False)))
        else:
            display(HTML(df[df["NPS"] == NPS].to_html(index=False)))

    NPS_dropdown = widgets.Dropdown(
        options = ["All"] + list(df["NPS"].unique()),
        description="Select NPS: "
        )

    widgets.interact(filter_df, NPS=NPS_dropdown);
